Lessons/11-Deployment.md, before:

# 📜 Day 11: Deployments

### ⏱ Agenda

1. [[**02m**] 🏆 Objectives](#02m--objectives)
2. [[**03m**] 🤔 Why You Should Know This](#03m--why-you-should-know-this)
3. [[**40m**] 📖 **Guided Tour**: Deploy Tutorial on Heroku](#40m--guided-tour-deploy-tutorial-on-heroku)
   1. [Step 0: Before We Get Started (5m)](#step-0-before-we-get-started-5m)
   2. [Step 1: Create Procfile (5m)](#step-1-create-procfile-5m)
   3. [Step 2: Add Dependencies to requirements.txt (5m)](#step-2-add-dependencies-to-requirementstxt-5m)
   4. [Step 3: Create New Heroku App (5m)](#step-3-create-new-heroku-app-5m)
   5. [Step 4: Setup Static Root (5m)](#step-4-setup-static-root-5m)
   6. [Step 5: Push to Heroku (5m)](#step-5-push-to-heroku-5m)
   7. [Step 6: Push to GitHub (2m)](#step-6-push-to-github-2m)
   8. [Step 7: Release Early and Often (5m)](#step-7-release-early-and-often-5m)
4. [[**10m**] 🌴 BREAK](#10m--break)
5. [[**40m**] 💻 **In Class Activity**: Deploy MakeWiki](#40m--in-class-activity-deploy-makewiki)
6. [📚 Resources & Credits](#-resources--credits)
   1. [Advanced Deployments](#advanced-deployments)

## [**02m**] 🏆 Objectives

1. Demonstrate a Django deployment illustrated live, step by step, with guided mini activities and skills drills.
2. Develop a generalized, standardized plan for deploying Django projects.
3. Describe each step required to deploy a Django project to a remote server.

## [**03m**] 🤔 Why You Should Know This

- Each experience in class today is engineered to support shipping your Contractor Project!
- In two hours, you'll have two opportunities to deploy a Django site to Heroku, along with two successfully shipped mini projects that you can reference when preparing to deploy your Contractor Project for the first time.
    - The [step by step guide](#60m--guided-tour-deploy-tutorial-on-heroku) in this plan works for _any_ Django application deployed to Heroku.
    - Wise students may consider bookmarking this plan to ensure stress-free, successful Django deployments in the future. Intensives kick off at the start of the new year!

## [**15m**] Hiding Secrets

In your Django project, 

## [**40m**] 📖 **Guided Tour**: Deploy Tutorial on Heroku

### Step 0: Before We Get Started (5m)

**This guide is resource meant to walk you through deploying ANY Django project on Heroku. Please note the following guidelines to ensure your deployment experience goes smoothly**!

1. Replace references to `uniqueprojectname` with a unique and memorable name for your project.
     - **Spaces aren't allowed in a project name, so be sure to replace any spaces in the string with dashes (`-`)**.
2. Replace references to `projectname` with the name of your Django project.
     - **Not sure what the project's name is?** Locate the folder that contains `settings.py` ‒ the name of that folder is your Django project name.

Now that we know how to use this guide later on, let's get started. **Open your your Django tutorial codebase in your editor**, and complete each step as guided by the instructor.

### Step 1: Create Procfile (5m)

In your project root, **create a file called `Procfile`** and **add the following line of code** inside:

```txt
web: gunicorn projectname.wsgi --log-file -
```

**What does this line of code tell Heroku to do?**
- `web`: Informs the Heroku Dyno that your project is a web project.
- `projectname.wsgi` Tells the Dyno to look at a file called `wsgi` in the folder called `projectname`.
    - This file is included when you create a new Django project.
- `—-log-file -` Write all terminal output to the logs.
    - View your Heroku logs by running `heroku logs`.

### Step 2: Add Dependencies to requirements.txt (5m)

Heroku recommends completing this step early on to make sure your `Procfile` works, and that the Dyno has everything it needs in order to successfully install your project and deploy it live.

🤔 **What files are required to successfully deploy on Heroku?**

The following files in this list live in the project's root directory, and **must be included in order to successfully deploy your project**:

- `requirements.txt`: A list of dependencies to install before starting the server.
- `Procfile`: Contains the command Heroku will run to start the server.

Add the new dependencies to `requirements.txt` so that they are installed when you next push to Heroku:

```txt
django==2.2.7
gunicorn
```

### Step 3: Create New Heroku App (5m)

- **3a**: In your terminal, run the following command to create a new Dyno, where your project will be installed and deployed for use by the public.

    ```bash
    heroku create uniqueprojectname
    ```

- **3b**: Open your editor, and add the following strings to the blank `ALLOWED_HOSTS` list in `settings.py`:

    ```python
    ALLOWED_HOSTS = ['localhost', 'uniqueprojectname.herokuapp.com']
    ```

    🤔 **What do these values mean?**
    - `localhost`: Development environment ‒ the place where you write code.
    - `uniqueprojectname.herokuapp.com`: Production environment - the place you deploy your finished code to show others.

### Step 4: Setup Static Root (5m)

Add the following string to `settings.py`:

```python
STATIC_ROOT = os.path.join(BASE_DIR, 'static')
```

### Step 5: Push to Heroku (5m)

Add, commit, and push your changes to Heroku!

```bash
git add .
git commit -m "tweaked settings for deployment"
git push heroku master
```

#### Common Issues & Questions

- ⚠️ **GET AN ERROR?**: When deploying with Git, Heroku wants to initiate the repo from the project root, where your ` manage.py`  file lives. You might notice in the tutorial repo that `manage.py` is one level down. Even though running the app locally with Heroku worked, if you try to deploy with `git push heroku master` you’ll receive an error that says `Failed to detect app`. You can fix this by running the following command instead of `git push heroku master`:

    ```bash
    git subtree push --prefix projectname heroku master
    ```

- 🛑 **GET A DIFFERENT ERROR?**: Run `heroku logs` in your terminal, then raise your hand to receive 1 on 1 feedback from your instructor on the state of your deployment.
- 🤔 **Why does pushing to Heroku take so long?!**
  - Each time you push to Heroku, it kicks off the following deployment workflow:
    1. Examine `requirements.txt` for changes since the last deployment.
          - Installs new dependencies automatically.
    2. Run all new migrations found since the last deployment.
          - Heroku executes the exact same `manage.py` commands we've practiced all term!
    3. Launch the production server according to the command in the `Procfile`.

### Step 6: Push to GitHub (2m)

Once you know everything works, push to GitHub.

```bash
git push origin master
```

### Step 7: Release Early and Often (5m)

**So far, we've accomplished**:

- Creating a live website, located at `https://uniqueprojectname.herokuapp.com`.
- We've done all the work required to release new features and bug fixes early and often!

<p style="color:red; font-weight: bold;">You should strive to frequently push to your production server ‒ anytime you fix a bug or add a new feature. That means you may find yourself pushing code to Heroku multiple times a day ‒ just like most major companies!</p>

## [**10m**] 🌴 BREAK

## [**40m**] 💻 **In Class Activity**: Deploy MakeWiki

1. Follow all the steps above to deploy the MakeWiki project. When complete, you should have a live, working website that looks similar to [this example](https://makewiki-dani-test.herokuapp.com) created using today's step by step plan.
2. Add at least two new Pages in the admin.
3. Test the application's workflow in the browser:
   1. Sign Up
   2. Log In
   3. Create Page
   4. Log Out
4. Let's practice deploying a change to our project.
      1. In `wiki/views.py`, modify `PageListView` to return all `Page` objects sorted by the `created` date, newest first.
      2. Test the change locally to make sure it works.
      3. Add, commit, and push the change to Heroku.
      4. Verify that the change on your live website.
5. Add your Heroku link to column K of the [Course Tracker](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1lqgLdtLawKbIfsHinBktLNc2i_Axtmex6oHOsmlkCXg/edit#gid=1530489478&range=K:K).
6. _(Optional)_ Celebrate your second deployment! Slack the link to your working deployment in our class channel.

## 📚 Resources & Credits

### Advanced Deployments

- [Howto: Deploy on Heroku Using PostgreSQL](./Lessons/HowTo-DeployWithPostgres.md)
- [Provisioning Heroku Postgres](https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/heroku-postgresql#provisioning-heroku-postgres)
- [Painless PostgreSQL + Django](https://medium.com/agatha-codes/painless-postgresql-django-d4f03364989)
- [9 Straightforward Steps for Deploying Your Django App With Heroku](https://medium.com/agatha-codes/9-straightforward-steps-for-deploying-your-django-app-with-heroku-82b952652fb4)

Commit message:

add vibe check to all lessons

Lessons/11-Deployment.md, after:

# 📜 Day 11: Deployments

### ⏱ Agenda

1. [[**02m**] 🏆 Objectives](#02m--objectives)
2. [[**03m**] 🤔 Why You Should Know This](#03m--why-you-should-know-this)
3. [[**40m**] 📖 **Guided Tour**: Deploy Tutorial on Heroku](#40m--guided-tour-deploy-tutorial-on-heroku)
   1. [Step 0: Before We Get Started (5m)](#step-0-before-we-get-started-5m)
   2. [Step 1: Create Procfile (5m)](#step-1-create-procfile-5m)
   3. [Step 2: Add Dependencies to requirements.txt (5m)](#step-2-add-dependencies-to-requirementstxt-5m)
   4. [Step 3: Create New Heroku App (5m)](#step-3-create-new-heroku-app-5m)
   5. [Step 4: Setup Static Root (5m)](#step-4-setup-static-root-5m)
   6. [Step 5: Push to Heroku (5m)](#step-5-push-to-heroku-5m)
   7. [Step 6: Push to GitHub (2m)](#step-6-push-to-github-2m)
   8. [Step 7: Release Early and Often (5m)](#step-7-release-early-and-often-5m)
4. [[**10m**] 🌴 BREAK](#10m--break)
5. [[**40m**] 💻 **In Class Activity**: Deploy MakeWiki](#40m--in-class-activity-deploy-makewiki)
6. [📚 Resources & Credits](#-resources--credits)
   1. [Advanced Deployments](#advanced-deployments)

## [**02m**] 🏆 Objectives

1. Demonstrate a Django deployment illustrated live, step by step, with guided mini activities and skills drills.
2. Develop a generalized, standardized plan for deploying Django projects.
3. Describe each step required to deploy a Django project to a remote server.

## [**03m**] 🤔 Why You Should Know This

- Each experience in class today is engineered to support shipping your Contractor Project!
- In two hours, you'll have two opportunities to deploy a Django site to Heroku, along with two successfully shipped mini projects that you can reference when preparing to deploy your Contractor Project for the first time.
    - The [step by step guide](#60m--guided-tour-deploy-tutorial-on-heroku) in this plan works for _any_ Django application deployed to Heroku.
    - Wise students may consider bookmarking this plan to ensure stress-free, successful Django deployments in the future. Intensives kick off at the start of the new year!

## [**15m**] Hiding Secrets

In your Django project, 

## [**40m**] 📖 **Guided Tour**: Deploy Tutorial on Heroku

### Step 0: Before We Get Started (5m)

**This guide is resource meant to walk you through deploying ANY Django project on Heroku. Please note the following guidelines to ensure your deployment experience goes smoothly**!

1. Replace references to `uniqueprojectname` with a unique and memorable name for your project.
     - **Spaces aren't allowed in a project name, so be sure to replace any spaces in the string with dashes (`-`)**.
2. Replace references to `projectname` with the name of your Django project.
     - **Not sure what the project's name is?** Locate the folder that contains `settings.py` ‒ the name of that folder is your Django project name.

Now that we know how to use this guide later on, let's get started. **Open your your Django tutorial codebase in your editor**, and complete each step as guided by the instructor.

### Step 1: Create Procfile (5m)

In your project root, **create a file called `Procfile`** and **add the following line of code** inside:

```txt
web: gunicorn projectname.wsgi --log-file -
```

**What does this line of code tell Heroku to do?**
- `web`: Informs the Heroku Dyno that your project is a web project.
- `projectname.wsgi` Tells the Dyno to look at a file called `wsgi` in the folder called `projectname`.
    - This file is included when you create a new Django project.
- `—-log-file -` Write all terminal output to the logs.
    - View your Heroku logs by running `heroku logs`.

### Step 2: Add Dependencies to requirements.txt (5m)

Heroku recommends completing this step early on to make sure your `Procfile` works, and that the Dyno has everything it needs in order to successfully install your project and deploy it live.

🤔 **What files are required to successfully deploy on Heroku?**

The following files in this list live in the project's root directory, and **must be included in order to successfully deploy your project**:

- `requirements.txt`: A list of dependencies to install before starting the server.
- `Procfile`: Contains the command Heroku will run to start the server.

Add the new dependencies to `requirements.txt` so that they are installed when you next push to Heroku:

```txt
django==2.2.7
gunicorn
```

### Step 3: Create New Heroku App (5m)

- **3a**: In your terminal, run the following command to create a new Dyno, where your project will be installed and deployed for use by the public.

    ```bash
    heroku create uniqueprojectname
    ```

- **3b**: Open your editor, and add the following strings to the blank `ALLOWED_HOSTS` list in `settings.py`:

    ```python
    ALLOWED_HOSTS = ['localhost', 'uniqueprojectname.herokuapp.com']
    ```

    🤔 **What do these values mean?**
    - `localhost`: Development environment ‒ the place where you write code.
    - `uniqueprojectname.herokuapp.com`: Production environment - the place you deploy your finished code to show others.

### Step 4: Setup Static Root (5m)

Add the following string to `settings.py`:

```python
STATIC_ROOT = os.path.join(BASE_DIR, 'static')
```

### Step 5: Push to Heroku (5m)

Add, commit, and push your changes to Heroku!

```bash
git add .
git commit -m "tweaked settings for deployment"
git push heroku master
```

#### Common Issues & Questions

- ⚠️ **GET AN ERROR?**: When deploying with Git, Heroku wants to initiate the repo from the project root, where your ` manage.py`  file lives. You might notice in the tutorial repo that `manage.py` is one level down. Even though running the app locally with Heroku worked, if you try to deploy with `git push heroku master` you’ll receive an error that says `Failed to detect app`. You can fix this by running the following command instead of `git push heroku master`:

    ```bash
    git subtree push --prefix projectname heroku master
    ```

- 🛑 **GET A DIFFERENT ERROR?**: Run `heroku logs` in your terminal, then raise your hand to receive 1 on 1 feedback from your instructor on the state of your deployment.
- 🤔 **Why does pushing to Heroku take so long?!**
  - Each time you push to Heroku, it kicks off the following deployment workflow:
    1. Examine `requirements.txt` for changes since the last deployment.
          - Installs new dependencies automatically.
    2. Run all new migrations found since the last deployment.
          - Heroku executes the exact same `manage.py` commands we've practiced all term!
    3. Launch the production server according to the command in the `Procfile`.

### Step 6: Push to GitHub (2m)

Once you know everything works, push to GitHub.

```bash
git push origin master
```

### Step 7: Release Early and Often (5m)

**So far, we've accomplished**:

- Creating a live website, located at `https://uniqueprojectname.herokuapp.com`.
- We've done all the work required to release new features and bug fixes early and often!

<p style="color:red; font-weight: bold;">You should strive to frequently push to your production server ‒ anytime you fix a bug or add a new feature. That means you may find yourself pushing code to Heroku multiple times a day ‒ just like most major companies!</p>

## [**10m**] 🌴 BREAK

## [**40m**] 💻 **In Class Activity**: Deploy MakeWiki

1. Follow all the steps above to deploy the MakeWiki project. When complete, you should have a live, working website that looks similar to [this example](https://makewiki-dani-test.herokuapp.com) created using today's step by step plan.
2. Add at least two new Pages in the admin.
3. Test the application's workflow in the browser:
   1. Sign Up
   2. Log In
   3. Create Page
   4. Log Out
4. Let's practice deploying a change to our project.
      1. In `wiki/views.py`, modify `PageListView` to return all `Page` objects sorted by the `created` date, newest first.
      2. Test the change locally to make sure it works.
      3. Add, commit, and push the change to Heroku.
      4. Verify that the change on your live website.
5. Add your Heroku link to column K of the [Course Tracker](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1lqgLdtLawKbIfsHinBktLNc2i_Axtmex6oHOsmlkCXg/edit#gid=1530489478&range=K:K).
6. _(Optional)_ Celebrate your second deployment! Slack the link to your working deployment in our class channel.

## Wrap-Up

Fill out the [Vibe Check](https://make.sc/bew1.2-vibe-check) form to let your instructor know of any thoughts or feelings you'd like to share about the class!

## 📚 Resources & Credits

### Advanced Deployments

- [Howto: Deploy on Heroku Using PostgreSQL](./Lessons/HowTo-DeployWithPostgres.md)
- [Provisioning Heroku Postgres](https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/heroku-postgresql#provisioning-heroku-postgres)
- [Painless PostgreSQL + Django](https://medium.com/agatha-codes/painless-postgresql-django-d4f03364989)
- [9 Straightforward Steps for Deploying Your Django App With Heroku](https://medium.com/agatha-codes/9-straightforward-steps-for-deploying-your-django-app-with-heroku-82b952652fb4)
