01-Catching-The-Ruby-Train/README.md, before:

# Day 1 - Rails and You: Catching The Ruby Train

## Learning Objectives/Competencies

1. Identify and describe common Ruby syntax features.
1. Define common syntactical Ruby idioms.
1. Present language syntax features to the class.

## Initial Exercise

- **Think, Pair, Share - Ruby Rumors**: _What have you heard about Ruby / Ruby on Rails?_

## Overview/TT I

### TT: Why Ruby / Syntax Overview / Setup Activity

_TODO_

## In Class Activity I

### Language Features

_TODO: Create list of language features to assign to student groups._

- Form students into 5 groups.
- Assign a Ruby language feature to each group.
- Announce target presentation time: each group will be responsible for an 8 minute presentation.
- Each group will create a short slide deck describing the language feature they've been assigned.

## In Class Activity II

### Language Feature Presentations

- Each group will deliver an approximately 8 minute presentation on the assigned Ruby topic.

## Wrap Up

- Synthesize the main points of presentations with the class.
- Introduce topics for tomorrow.

## After Class

_TODO_

## Additional Resources

_TODO_

Commit message:

[add] flesh out day 1 language features presentations

01-Catching-The-Ruby-Train/README.md, after:

# Day 1 - Rails and You: Catching The Ruby Train

## Learning Objectives/Competencies

1. Identify and describe common Ruby syntax features.
1. Define common syntactical Ruby idioms.
1. Present language syntax features to the class.

## Initial Exercise

- **Think, Pair, Share - Ruby Rumors**: _What have you heard about Ruby / Ruby on Rails?_

## Overview/TT I

### TT: Why Ruby / Syntax Overview / Setup Activity

_TODO_

## In Class Activity I

### Language Features

- Form students into 5 groups.
- Assign a Ruby syntax feature to each group:
    - Operators and Keywords
    - Variables (Instance, Global, and Types of Variables)
    - Methods (Class Methods, Method Arguments)
    - Blocks and Block Arguments (Closures, Iterators, Generators)
    - Arrays and Hashes
- Announce target presentation time: each group will be responsible for an 8 minute presentation.
- Each group will create a short slide deck describing the language feature they've been assigned.

## In Class Activity II

### Language Feature Presentations

- Each group will deliver an approximately 8 minute presentation on the assigned Ruby topic.

## Wrap Up

- Synthesize the main points of presentations with the class.
- Introduce topics for tomorrow.

## After Class

_TODO_

## Additional Resources

* [A Quick (and Hopefully Painless) Ride Through Ruby](https://poignant.guide/book/chapter-3.html)
